Suggested Accessibility Guidelines (#1944)
ILIAS-eLearning/ILIAS: docs/documentation/accessibility.md

# Accessibility Guidelines

## PREAMBLE
According the [Strategy 2017](http://www.ilias.de/docu/goto_docu_file_5585_download.html)
ILIAS aims to to be "Usable for Everyone" including users with special needs.
ILIAS is to be perceivable, operable, understandable and of robust use for all users.
ILIAS enables users to locate, identify, access, and operate objects and services provided. 
These guidelines outline functional accessibility requirements as set out by EN 301 549. V2.1.2 of August 2018. Please consult [https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/301500_301599/301549/02.01.02_30/en_301549v020102v.pdf](url)

> EN 301 549 reflects WCAG 2.1 Recommendation Level A and AA. Please consult [https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/] this document is referenced below. For each success criterion there are additional links provided on "Understanding this Particular Success Criterion" and "How to Meet this particular Success Criterion": Developers are advised to look up this information is is a valuable self-education resource. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EN 301 549 reflects WCAG 2.1 Recommendation Level A and AA. Please consult [https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/] this document is referenced below. For each success criterion there are additional links provided on "Understanding this Particular Success Criterion" and "How to Meet this particular Success Criterion": We encourage developers to look up this information as it is a valuable self-education resource. 
```

These guidelines reference both documents. 

> Because ILIAS is rendered in a browser it is categorised as a ‘web page’ by EN 301 549. This is not how it feels to us. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because ILIAS is rendered in a browser it is categorised as a ‘web page’ by EN 301 549, even though this might not feel right to us. ```

> CAVEAT: ILIAS purpose however is to facilitate learning which typically involves content. This content is categorised either as ‘non-web document’ or as ‘web page’. The content is generated by users and beyond the control of ILIAS and not covered by these guidelines. Editors and forms allowing users to generate content are to encourage producing accessible output if possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CAVEAT: ILIAS purpose however is to facilitate learning which typically involves content. This content is categorised either as ‘non-web document’ or as ‘web page’. The content is generated by users and beyond the control of ILIAS and thus not covered by these guidelines. Editors and forms allowing users to generate content are to encourage producing accessible output if possible.
```

HTML-Content rendered by ILIAS shall conform to EN 301 549 / WCAG 2.1 Recommendation Level A and AA. 

> 1.	Controls provide at least on mode of operation that does not require vision. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.	Controls provide at least one mode of operation that does not require vision. 
```

2.	Visual modes of operation provide features enabling users to make better use of their limited vision. 
3.	No mode of operation relies exclusively on the perception of colour, there is at least one additional method of distinction. 
4.	If there ever was an auditory mode of operation, there must be at least one mode of operation that does not require hearing. 
5.	If there ever was a vocal mode of operation, there must be at least one mode that can be operated without vocal output. 

> 6.	Controls that require manual action provide at least on mode of operation that does not require manipulation or hand strength. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6.	Controls that require manual action provide at least one mode of operation that does not require manipulation or hand strength. 
```

> 7.	[Reach does not apply]

Reviewer: I would propose to remove this list item. I understand the impulse to put it in here for reference sake, but I feel it reduces readability a lot and is very confusing.

8.	No control has the potential for triggering photosensitive seizures. 

> 9.	We will try to accommodate users with limited cognitive, language or learning abilities. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9.	We will do our best to accommodate users with limited cognitive, language or learning abilities. 
```
I think we could be more forceful here, but you can also choose to simply ignore this suggestion

- **Incidental**: Text or images of text that are part of an inactive user interface component, that are pure decoration, that are not visible to anyone, or that are part of a picture that contains significant other visual content, have no contrast requirement.
- **Logotypes**: Text that is part of a logo or brand name has no contrast requirement.

#### Success Criterion Resize text
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 1.4.4 Level AA / EN 301 549 > 9.1.4.4

Target group: developer

How to: [Understand Resize text](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/resize-text.html)

How to: [Meet Resize text](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#resize-text)

Except for captions and images of text, it MUST be possible to resize text without assistive technology up to 200 percent without loss of content or functionality.

#### Success Criterion Images of Text
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 1.4.5 Level AA / EN 301 549 > 9.1.4.5

Target group: creator of content, developer

How to: [Understand Images of Text](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/images-of-text.html)

How to: [Meet Images of Text](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#images-of-text)

> If the technologies being used can achieve the visual presentation, text is MUST be used to convey information rather than images of text except for the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the technologies being used can achieve the visual presentation, text MUST be used to convey information rather than images of text except for the following:
```

Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 1.4.11 Level AA / EN 301 549 > 9.1.4.11

Target group: creator of content, developer

How to: [Understand Non-text Contrast](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-contrast.html)

How to: [Meet Non-text Contrast](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#non-text-contrast)

The visual presentation of the following MUST have a contrast ratio of at least 3:1 against adjacent color(s):

- **User Interface Components**: Visual information required to identify user interface components and states, except for inactive components or where the appearance of the component is determined by the user agent and not modified by the author;

- **Graphical Objects**: Parts of graphics required to understand the content, except when a particular presentation of graphics is essential to the information being conveyed.

#### Success Criterion Text Spacing
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 1.4.12 Level AA / EN 301 549 > 9.1.4.12

Target group: creator of content, developer

How to: [Understand Text Spacing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/text-spacing.html)

How to: [Meet Text Spacing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#text-spacing)

> In content implemented using markup languages that support the following text style properties, no loss of content or functionality MUST occurs by setting all of the following and by changing no other style property:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In content implemented using markup languages that support the following text style properties, no loss of content or functionality MUST occur by setting all of the following and by changing no other style property:
```

- **Hoverable**: If pointer hover can trigger the additional content, then the pointer can be moved over the additional content without the additional content disappearing;

- **Persistent**: The additional content remains visible until the hover or focus trigger is removed, the user dismisses it, or its information is no longer valid.

Exception: The visual presentation of the additional content is controlled by the user agent and is not modified by the author.
Custom tooltips, sub-menus, and other nonmodal popups that display on hover and focus are examples of additional content covered by this criterion.

### Principle Operable
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 2. / EN 301 549 > 9.2

User interface components and navigation MUST be operable.

#### Guideline Keyboard Accessible
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 2.1 / EN 301 549 > 9.2.1

All functionality MUST be available from a keyboard.

#### Success Criterion Keyboard
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 2.1.1 Level A / EN 301 549 > 9.2.1.1

Target group: creator of content, developer

How to: [Understand Keyboard](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/keyboard.html)

How to: [Meet Keyboard](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#keyboard)

> All functionality of the content MUST be operable through a keyboard interface without requiring specific timings for individual keystrokes, except where the underlying function requires input that depends on the path of the user's movement and

Reviewer: ```suggestion

All functionality of the content MUST be operable through a keyboard interface without requiring specific timings for individual keystrokes, except where the underlying function requires input that depends on the path of the user's movement and
```

#### Success Criterion Name, Role, Value
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 4.1.2 Level A / EN 301 549 > 9.4.1.2
For all user interface components (including but not limited to: form elements, links and components generated by scripts), the name and role can be programmatically determined; states, properties, and values that can be set by the user can be programmatically set; and notification of changes to these items is available to user agents, including assistive technologies. This success criterion is primarily for Web authors who develop or script their own user interface components. For example, standard HTML controls already meet this success criterion when used according to specification.

#### Success Criterion Status Messages
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 4.1.3 Level AA / EN 301 549 > 9.4.1.3
In content implemented using markup languages, status messages can be programmatically determined through role or properties such that they can be presented to the user by assistive technologies without receiving focus.

# CONFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

> Reference: EN 301 549 > 9.5

Author: Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 5.2  / EN 301 549 > 9.5

[Meeting Status Messages](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#status-messages)

In content implemented using markup languages, status messages MUST be programmatically determined through role or properties such that they can be presented to the user by assistive technologies without receiving focus.

# Cheat Sheet
This list is prepared to inform developers what accessibility means for their daily work. This list was prepared by the SIG accessibility to their best knowledge. Still it may contain some errors. 
Thus, we suggest to use compliance testing as a yardstick for quality: Compliance testing is more important than these phrases, we will adapt these phrases via the jour fixe if compliance testing indicates they are erroneous or lacking information.  
We still hope the following list is helpful in everyday work.

## Structure 
Check how your suggested element fits into our semantic structures. 
1.	Write “well formed” HTML, employ HTML according to the specification with complete start and end tags and compliant nesting. Assistive technology will crash on missing start or end tags. (4.1.1)

> 2.	We use aria landmarks and headlines to furnish ILIAS with semantic structures. Regions of the page and navigation are structured by aria landmarks. Content gets structured by headlines. The element provides programmatically determinable semantic structures to convey information and relationships (1.3.1).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.	We use aria landmarks and headlines to furnish ILIAS with semantic structures. Regions of the page and navigation are structured by aria landmarks. Content gets structured by headlines. These elements provide programmatically determinable semantic structures to convey information and relationships (1.3.1).  
```

   pause, stop, or hide it or to control the frequency of the update unless the
   auto-updating is part of an activity where it is essential.

### Guideline Seizures
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 2.3 / EN 301 549 > 9.2.3

One MUST not design content in a way that is known to cause seizures.

#### Success Criterion Three Flashes or Below Threshold
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 2.3.1 Level A / EN 301 549 > 9.2.3.1

Target group: creator of content

How to: [Understand Three Flashes or Below Threshold](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/three-flashes-or-below-threshold.html)

How to: [Meet Three Flashes or Below Threshold](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#three-flashes-or-below-threshold)

> Web pages MUST not contain anything that flashes more than three times in any one second period, or the flash is below the general flash nd red flash thresholds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Web pages MUST not contain anything that flashes more than three times in any one second period, or the flash is below the general flash and red flash thresholds.
```

#### Success Criterion Status Messages
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 4.1.3 Level AA / EN 301 549 > 9.4.1.3

Target group: developer

How to: [Understand Status Messages](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/status-messages.html)

How to: [Meet Status Messages](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#status-messages)

In content implemented using markup languages, status messages MUST be programmatically determined through role or properties such that they can be presented to the user by assistive technologies without receiving focus.

# Conformance Requirements
Reference: EN 301 549 > 9.5
ILIAS MUST satisfy all the following five WCAG 2.1 conformance requirements at Level AA. 
1) Conformance level 
2) Full pages 
3) Complete processes 
4) Only Accessibility-Supported Ways of Using Technologies 
5) Non-interference

# Cheat Sheet
This list is prepared to inform developers what accessibility means for their daily work. This list was prepared by the SIG accessibility to their best knowledge. Still it may contain some errors. 

> Thus, we suggest to make the compliance testing as a quality yardstick: The compliance testing is more important than these phrases, we will adopt these phrases via the jour fixe if the compliance testing indicates these phrases are erroneous or lacking information.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, we suggest to use compliance testing as a yardstick for quality: Compliance testing is more important than these phrases, we will adapt these phrases via the jour fixe if compliance testing indicates they are erroneous or lacking information.  
```

> We still hope the following phrases are helpful in everyday work: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We still hope the following list is helpful in everyday work.
```

## Structure 
Check how your suggested element fits into our semantic structures. 

> 1.	Write “well formed” HTML, employ HTML according to the specification: complete start and end tags and are nested according to specification. Assistive technology will crash on missing start or end tags. (4.1.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.	Write “well formed” HTML, employ HTML according to the specification with complete start and end tags and compliant nesting. Assistive technology will crash on missing start or end tags. (4.1.1)
```

> 2.	We use aria landmarks and headlines to furnish ILIAS with semantic structures. Regions of the page and navigation are structured by aria landmarks. Content gets structured by headlines. The element provides programmatically determinable semantic structures to convey information and relationships (1.3.1).  

Reviewer: What do you mean by "the element" should it be:
- Elements provide programmatically ...
- Or: Aria landmarks provide programmatically...?

Author: Elements provide programmatically ...
Specifically: in content the headlines provide semantic structure and "in ILIAS" aria roles provide semantic structures. Thus we have an approach for all realms.

3.	Users must be able to skip ‘repeated content of second rank’ i.e. Secondary Panels (2.4.1). Use aria landmark role ‘complementary’ to make elements skippable. 

> 4.	Make the DOM order matches the visual order (1.3.2). When the source order matches the visual order, everyone will read the content and interact with it in the same (correct) order. If this will not work use tabindex 0. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4.	Make the DOM order matche the visual order (1.3.2). When the source order matches the visual order, everyone will read the content and interact with it in the same (correct) order. If this will not work use tabindex 0. 
```

5.	Make sure that repeated navigational components occur in the same place and same relative order each time they appear. (3.2.3) 
## Headings and Labels and Language
6.	Our headings and labels have to be clear and descriptive (2.4.6). 
7.	Provide clear and descriptive labels for any field that requires input. AND one of the following (3.3.2)

•	Provide text instructions describing the necessary input in a by-line to the field.
•	Use aria-describedby property to provide information about a user interface element. 

> 8.	Always use the language attribute on the HTML element. Screen reader change pronunciation automatically. (3.1.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8.	Always use the language attribute on the HTML element. Screen readers change pronunciation automatically. (3.1.1)
```

> 9.	Indicate the language for each chunk of text (3.1.2). Using the language attribute on the HTML element. Screen reader change pronunciation automatically. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9.	Indicate the language for each chunk of text (3.1.2). Using the language attribute on the HTML element. Screen readers change pronunciation automatically. 
```

> 10.	Functional and informative components i.e. labels and icons must have consistent labels, aria-labels and alt-texts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10.	Functional and informative components, i.e. labels and icons, must have consistent labels, aria-labels and alt-texts. 
```

## Alt-Texts and aria labels
11.	All non-text elements (icons, glyphs, images, graphs and the like) must have alt-texts (1.1.1). Do they? For all their statuses? 
12.	The aria-label for an element must contain the text the element presents (2.5.3). This is really important for speech input. 
13.	Use aria-label to provide an invisible label where a visible label cannot be used. (4.1.2)

> 14.	If drag & drop is uses wen have to make sure dropping can be cancel and that accessible names can be matched to visible labels. (2.5.2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
14.	If drag & drop is used one has to make sure dropping can be cancel and that accessible names can be matched to visible labels. (2.5.2)
```

## Colour and Contrast
Please check your suggested element for colour and contrast issues. 
15.	Use of colour as a visual cue is only ok if it is accompanied by text or shape with alt-text 1.4.1.

> 16.	Text must have a contrast ratio of at least 4,5:1 to background for normal text and at least 3:1 for text at least 18 point (1.4.3). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
16.	Text must have a contrast ratio of at least 4,5:1 to background for normal text and at least 3:1 for text bigger than 18 points in size (1.4.3). 
```

17.	Controls and states must have a contrast ratio of at least 3:1 against adjacent colours. Same applies for charts (result presentation) because they convey meaning (1.4.11). 
## Resize and Reflow

> 18.	ILIAS can be resize up to 200 percent without loss of content or functionality (1.4.4).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
18.	ILIAS can be resized by up to 200 percent without loss of content or functionality (1.4.4).
```

> 19.	All Content can be presented without loss of information or functionality, and without requiring scrolling in two dimensions for: Vertical scrolling content at a width equivalent to 320 CSS pixels; Horizontal scrolling content at a height equivalent to 256 CSS pixels. 320 CSS pixels is equivalent to a starting viewport width of 1280 CSS pixels wide at 400% zoom. For web content which is designed to scroll horizontally (e.g., with vertical text), 256 CSS pixels is equivalent to a starting viewport height of 1024 CSS pixels at 400% zoom. (1.4.10)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
19.	All Content can be presented without loss of information or functionality, and without requiring scrolling in two dimensions for: Vertical scrolling content at a width equivalent to 320 CSS pixels; Horizontal scrolling content at a height equivalent to 256 CSS pixels. 320 CSS pixels is equivalent to a starting viewport width of 1280 CSS pixels at 400% zoom. For web content which is designed to scroll horizontally (e.g., with vertical text), 256 CSS pixels is equivalent to a starting viewport height of 1024 CSS pixels at 400% zoom. (1.4.10)
```

## Forms
20.	Standard HTML controls meet accessibility requirements when used according to specification. If we prepare our own controls name and role MUST be determinable programmatically; states, properties, and values that can be set by the user MUST be programmatically settable; and notification of changes to these items MUST be available to user agents, including assistive technologies. (4.1.2)
21.	All input fields gathering information about the user have a label clearly stating the purpose of this field (1.3.5).
22.	Use an onchange event on a select element to update other elements i.e. in a form without causing a change of context. (3.2.2)
## Messages 

> 23.	Make users aware that an error has occurred and help them to determine what is wrong i.e. by indicating form fields in error.  Make Failure Message messages as specific as possible.  (3.3.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
23.	Make users aware that an error has occurred and help them to determine what is wrong i.e. by indicating form fields in the error message.  Make failure messages as specific as possible.  (3.3.1)
```

> •	Use aria-required property to identify required fields Use role aria-invalid on required fields that have no input. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Use aria-required property to identify required fields.
- Use role aria-invalid on required fields that have no input. 
- Use aria role alertdialog for the Failure message. 

```

•	Use aria role alertdialog for the Failure message. 

> 24.	We must have confirmation dialogues before action is taken that has serious consequences and / or cannot be reversed i.e. deleting objects. (3.3.4)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
24.	We must have confirmation dialogues before an action is taken that has serious consequences and / or cannot be reversed i.e. deleting objects. (3.3.4)
```

25.	Use the aria role status for status messages. (4.1.3)
## Extra Content 

> 26.	If an element like a tab gets keyboard focus or receives the pointer hover and then additional content i.e.  a tool tip or a popover is displayed. We have to make sure the additional content does not interfere with the usage of the rest of the page: The additional content must be dismissable i.e. by Esc or X. The additional content must be hoverable itself and not disappear once the trigger is left. (1.4.13)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
26.	If an element like a tab gets keyboard focus or receives the pointer hover and then additional content i.e.  a tool tip or a popover is displayed. We have to make sure the additional content does not interfere with the usage of the rest of the page: The additional content must be dismissable for example by clicking Esc or X. The additional content must be hoverable itself and must not disappear once the trigger is left. (1.4.13)
```

## Tabbing and Focus
27.	All functionality must be operable by tabbing or number pad arrows. (2.1.1) 

> 28.	Users can tab to any control, operate it and tab away again. (2.1.2) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
28.	Users can tab to any control, operate it, and tab away again. (2.1.2) 
```

> 29.	Keyboard focus must be always visible. The element that has focus gets a corona (2.4.7) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
29.	Keyboard focus must be always visible. The element that has focus gets a corona. (2.4.7) 
```

> 30.	Tabbing order must be sensible and predictable.  The move of focus is following the meaning of the content and can be operated by tab. Moving focus should not jump around unpredictably.  (2.4.3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
30.	Tabbing order must be sensible and predictable. The move of focus is following the meaning of the content and can be operated by tab. Moving focus should not jump around unpredictably. (2.4.3)
```

31.	If an element gains focus it must not 
o	transfer users to a different context automatically and without warning i.e. open a new window. 
o	Carry out an action automatically i.e. submit a form after a save-button received focus. 
Give users advanced warning when opening a new window i.e. by using the target attribute which provides an unambiguously machine-readable indication that a new window will open. (3.2.1)
Give users a submit-button to initiate change of context. 
## Access Keys
32.	Important new functionality should get Access Keys. 
33.	Access Keys can be remapped to non-prinatble characters i.e.Ctrl to avoid being carried out accidentally (2.1.4). This is important for users using speech input, which could become a nuisance.  
Moving information
34.	Any moving, blinking, scrolling, or auto-updating information that starts automatically and goes on must offer an option for users to pause, stop or hide it (2.2.2)
35.	Consult https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/ to obtain guidance for your respective suggestion. 

> Manipulation by gestures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Manipulation by gestures
```

> 36.	People must be able to operate ILIAS with a single pointer Finger or mouse) and low accuracy (2.5.1). Making people use two fingers to enlarge something is not OK. Making people grab something and accurately put it first to point A to progress to point B is not OK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
36.	People must be able to operate ILIAS with a single pointer (finger or mouse) and low accuracy (2.5.1). Making people use two fingers to enlarge something is not OK. Making people grab something and accurately put it first to point A to progress to point B is not OK.
```

For all user interface components (including but not limited to: form elements, links and components generated by scripts), the name and role MUST be determinable programmatically; states, properties, and values that can be set by the user MUST be programmatically settable; and notification of changes to these items MUST be available to user agents, including assistive technologies. This success criterion is primarily for Web authors who develop or script their own user interface components. For example, standard HTML controls already meet this success criterion when used according to specification.

#### Success Criterion Status Messages
Reference: WCAG 2.1 > 4.1.3 Level AA / EN 301 549 > 9.4.1.3

Target group: developer

[Understanding Status Messages](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/status-messages.html)

[Meeting Status Messages](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#status-messages)

In content implemented using markup languages, status messages MUST be programmatically determined through role or properties such that they can be presented to the user by assistive technologies without receiving focus.

> # CONFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Author: # Conformance Requirements
